The Docker Compose command line is designed around,
in my opinion,
developer happiness. Which means we don't have to relearn
a whole bunch of new skills and we reduce the
amount of typing we have at the command line.
A lot. One of the great things here is that many
of the Docker commands you may be used to,
if you were not using Compose before,
are going to be similar, or the same,
with Docker Compose. We'll see those few examples in a
minute.
And realize that the IDE you're using may
have Docker or Docker Compose functionality built into it.
That's become an increasingly common situation given that
so many of us are starting to develop inside containers
and becomes a part of our developer workflow.
The IDE's, of course, are adding that functionality in.
In this course, I will largely be using Visual Studio Code.
That's mostly considered a text editor,
not a full-fledged IDE.
It, itself, has Docker
and Docker Compose functionality built in it.
I will leave most of that alone because frankly,
we're not all using the same IDE's
and every IDE is different.
I really believe that it's crucial for you to know the
command
line functionality before you start digging into the IDE.
Because the IDE may either be old,
or not complete, in its functionality.
So, I want you to understand,
and know well,
the command line because that will serve you for years
and years to come, as long as Docker Compose is being used.
Another thing you'll notice, in this course,
is Docker's idea around batteries included
but swappable.
What that means is that a lot of things come default
out-of-the-box.
They're all documented, but it's not always obvious what
the defaults
are. I will point those out when they make sense.
Realize, though, that most of the time,
if you don't like a setting or a default,
you can always change it.
For example, you can change the default file name for
Compose.
You can change what the project name is,
by the default, out of the command line.
It's just...there's a lot of options there you can change.
Realize that you don't always have to stick
with the default, but I will be focusing on the defaults
because
that typically is a time-tested rule that works
well for everyone. Also something to note here
is that Docker Compose CLI's versions
are not the same as the Compose file versions.
You saw me talk a few minutes ago about Docker Compose
Versions
2 and 3,
and those aren't directly related to the CLI versions.
Right now, I think the Compose file versions
are something like 2.4
and then there's a 3 branch,
obviously, and then in the Compose command line,
we have 1.23 I believe is the newest.
And if you're on older versions of Windows,
you may be using 1.21.
This is because these two things are on different tracks,
right. The Command line is used just
for local development most of the time,
and the file format is used for other things as well.
So think of it as sort of the client
and the server API kind of mentality,
right.
So, you just need to make sure that your command line
supports
the versions of the Compose files you're using.
Sometimes, if someone's using a bleeding edge version of
the Compose
file format,
they may be on a newer version than your CLI supports.
You'll get an error message when you see that.
So, if you ever see that in this course, or anytime in the
future,
just realize that it's probably due to your Compose CLI
being outdated, and you need to check for a new one.
The first example here is docker compose up.
You'll be using that a lot in this course.
It is the one-stop shop for going from nothing
to everything running.
You can use it usually just by downloading,
or cloning, a repo
and then if that repo has a Docker Compose file,
just jumping in that directory and typing docker compose
up.
This will spin up everything that was designed in that
Compose file, including building
and pulling of the images.
It will make sure that it creates the volumes,
and the networks, and then the containers,
before it then starts the containers
with all the settings you gave it in the foreground.
Most of the time,
you'll want to be doing a docker compose up -d,
and this puts it in detached mode just like docker run -d.
That would have run in the background.
Something that's not always obvious to people
when they start is that when you do a docker compose up the
first
time, it may build some images for you,
which is very handy.
But it's not always going to rebuild those images every
time something changes.
That's kind of dependent on your workflow.
We'll talk more about that stuff later, but do realize if
you want to
rebuild images every time you type the up command,
just add in a --build on the end of it
and that'll make sure that it happens.
The opposite of up is down.
So, in this case, it's the one-stop shop for stopping
all the containers, removing the containers,
removing the networks,
but it leaves the data alone by default.
One of the core principles of Docker is really protecting
your volume data
and only deleting it when you are specific
in the case that you want to do that.
So, it usually takes extra commands
or options to delete volumes.
In this case, if you add a -v at the end
to down, it will then remove the volumes.
This is what I usually have people do when they're
running Docker Compose and they have maybe a problem in
their app,
or it's not behaving like they expect,
and we want to have a clean slate.
I'll usually ask them to do a docker compose down -v to
wipe
out everything including the volume data,
and then do a docker compose up to freshly start
everything.
A few more quick example commands before
we jump into the next lecture.
Realize here that many of these have service
options at the end so you can type the command
and then the name of a service from the Compose file.
Note, it's not the container name.
It's the service name.
Then that command will be specific for just that service.
Options here include docker compose build for just building
the images
and not messing around with up or down.
Or just stopping, which is something you might do if you
just need to take a break or you need to free up some
resources to start something
else on your machine,
and you might just stop the containers
and not mess with them. Not actually delete them.
Even the ps option, like we have
with docker ps, exists here.
But you gain extra benefits by using it
with a Docker Compose version,
because it'll show you not just running
but also stopped containers.
It'll show you in an easier format,
which ports are open
and which errors might have happened if a container has
stopped.
I use that one a lot.
Other options here include push,
to push all the images in your Compose file up to the
registry.
Of course, that one requires that you name the images
properly
in your Compose file. Lastly,
logs and exec. These work exactly like you would expect
with the Docker command line where you can either just
type docker compose logs
and see all the logs,
for all of the containers running.
Or docker compose logs
and then the name of a service to filter to just those.
You'll see us using the exec command throughout this course
to do one-off commands inside our containers while we're developing.